---
layout: post
title: "My Son's Language Developement: Colors and Animals"
description: >
  My son is a little over two and unfortunately he has two huge nerds for
  parents. We tracked every word he's spoken to watch his language
  developement, and now you can join us!
image: /files/my-sons-words/Articulation_by_j_w_orr.png
image_alt: >
  A woodcut by JW Orr.
---

{% capture file_dir %}/files/my-sons-words/{% endcapture %}

My son Theo was born in the summer of 2016. My wife and I knew his language
development would be interesting, because she and her parents speak Cantonese
and my parents speak Spanish (although they did not really pass it on to me);
being huge nerds, we decided to record his progress.

{% comment %}
[![A plot showing the number of words my son could speak as a function of
age.][words_plot]][words_plot]

[words_plot]: {{ file_dir }}/theo_total_words.svg
{% endcomment %}


## The Data

We collected the data using a Google form. We decided a "word" was a phrase or
sign that Theo associated with a specific concept. This meant that when he
babbled "mama" or "baba" at 10 months we did not count those because we didn't
think he had a clear association. We did count some made-up words that had
clear association, but these were mostly in sign language where he would
invent signs to convey his meaning.

Still, we found data collection to be very difficult and error prone. Deciding
when Theo had a clear association was difficult because the best indicator was
that he used the word multiple times for the same thing. Sometimes these
reuses would be separated by many days, forcing us to try to remember when he
first used it. Additionally, as Theo got older and much better at language, we
ran into new issues. First, he was learning so fast that we had trouble
keeping up and remembering if a word had been recorded our not. Second, he
became so good at mimicking sounds that he would repeat words back to you, but
not remember them later.

Still, we think the data is a pretty good representation of his language
development. I'll spend a future post exploring some off the quality issues.

## Development

Theo spoke his first, real word at about 14 months old. It was "Woh woh",
which is the Cantonese word for the sound a dog makes, "woof", but is also
often used to mean the dog itself. Theo would happily sit in his stroller at
the park pointing at dogs and saying "Woh woh!" But he didn't use it for just
dogs, but also for cats, squirrels, and even crows when they were hopping
around on the ground. Perhaps most interesting, he stopped using "Woh woh"
after several months, and hasn't used it again.

His second spoken word took another month and was also Chinese, "Drop". It's a
word he heard constantly while learning to eat and drop things off his high
chair.

Most of his early development was [baby sign language][baby_sign]. He quickly
learned "milk", "cat", "more", "bye bye", "hot", "bath", "down", and "monkey".
The first four of those words were from a book, but "hot", "bath", "down", and
"monkey" were all signs he invented. Our favorite invented signs are "monkey"
and "pig". "Monkey" is made by holding one hand out with palm up and bouncing
the other on top of it, palm facing out and fingers spread. He invented this
sign after we used it while singing [Five Little Monkeys][five_monkeys]. "Pig"
is signed by rubbing your chin between thumb and index finger. He modeled this
sign after the hand motions I would make while reading [The Three Little
Pigs][three_pigs], specifically during the line "Not by the hair on my chiny
chin chin".

We suspect Theo picked up signing quickly because it was a universal language in
our house; Mom would only speak Cantonese and I would only speak English, but
we both responded to his signs.

[baby_sign]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baby_sign_language
[five_monkeys]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_Little_Monkeys
[three_pigs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Three_Little_Pigs

Theo slowly picked up sign language, Cantonese, English, Spanish, and learned
to make different animal sounds, over the next nine or so months. It wasn't
until right before his second birthday that his language acquisition took off,
as can bee seen in the plot of the number of words he had spoken by a certain
age.

[![A plot showing the number of words my son could speak as a function of
age.][words_plot_linear]][words_plot_linear]

[words_plot_linear]: {{ file_dir }}/theo_total_words_linear.svg

Theo's signing and animal sounds did not increase at the same rate as English
and Cantonese. Spanish he learned slowly, but with a large jump in a short
period followed by slow growth again. This structure is easy to explain: the
jump around his second birthday is from a weekend we spent visiting my
parents, who speak and read to him mostly in Spanish.

## Colors

[![A plot showing Theodore's first worlds with the various color names picked
out.][color_plot]][color_plot]

[color_plot]: {{ file_dir }}/theo_colors.svg

## Animals

[![A plot showing Theodore's first worlds with the various animal names picked
out.][animal_plot]][animal_plot]

[animal_plot]: {{ file_dir }}/theo_animals.svg

Theodore loves animals, and it shows in his language development. His first
word was "_Woh woh_", which he got from the sound barking dogs are said to
make in Cantonese. Instead of representing barking though, Theodore used it to
mean "a small animal on the ground". Initially dogs and cats were "_Woh woh_",
but he was inventive and started using it for squirrels and crows (but only
when they were hopping around).

Theo's first sign was for "_milk_", but his second sign word was "_cat_".

